Pluto, large, distant member of the solar system that formerly was regarded as the outermost and smallest planet. It also was considered the most recently discovered planet, having been found in 1930. In August 2006 the International Astronomical Union (IAU), the organization charged by the scientific community with classifying astronomical objects, voted to remove Pluto from the list of planets and give it the new classification of dwarf planet. The change reflects astronomers’ realization that Pluto is a large member of the Kuiper belt, a collection of debris of ice and rock left over from the formation of the solar system and now revolving around the Sun beyond Neptune’s orbit. (For the IAU’s distinction between planet and dwarf planet and further discussion of the change in Pluto’s classification, see planet.)
Pluto is not visible in the night sky to the unaided eye. Its largest moon, Charon, is close enough in size to Pluto that it has become common to refer to the two bodies as a double system. Pluto is designated by the symbol ♇.
Pluto is named for the god of the underworld in Roman mythology (the Greek equivalent is Hades). It is so distant that the Sun’s light, which travels about 300,000 km (186,000 miles) per second, takes more than five hours to reach it. An observer standing on Pluto’s surface would see the Sun as an extremely bright star in the dark sky, providing Pluto on average 1/1,600 of the amount of sunlight that reaches Earth. Pluto’s surface temperature therefore is so cold that common gases such as nitrogen and carbon monoxide exist there as ices.
Because of Pluto’s remoteness and small size, even the best telescopes on Earth and in Earth orbit could resolve little detail of its surface. Indeed, for decades, such basic information as its radius and mass had been difficult to determine. It was not until Pluto was visited by the U.S. spacecraft New Horizons, which flew by Pluto and its satellite Charon in July 2015, that many key questions about it and its environs were answered.
Pluto’s mean distance from the Sun, about 5.9 billion km (3.7 billion miles or 39.5 astronomical units), gives it an orbit larger than that of the outermost planet, Neptune. (One astronomical unit [AU] is the average distance from Earth to the Sun—about 150 million km [93 million miles].) Its orbit, compared with those of the planets, is atypical in several ways. It is more elongated, or eccentric, than any of the planetary orbits and more inclined (at 17.1°) to the ecliptic, the plane of Earth’s orbit, near which the orbits of most of the planets lie. In traveling its eccentric path around the Sun, Pluto varies in distance from 29.7 AU, at its closest point to the Sun (perihelion), to 49.5 AU, at its farthest point (aphelion). Because Neptune orbits in a nearly circular path at 30.1 AU, Pluto is for a small part of each revolution actually closer to the Sun than is Neptune. Nevertheless, the two bodies will never collide, because Pluto is locked in a stabilizing 3:2 resonance with Neptune; i.e., it completes two orbits around the Sun in exactly the time it takes Neptune to complete three. This gravitational interaction affects their orbits such that they can never pass closer than about 17 AU. The last time Pluto reached perihelion occurred in 1989; for about 10 years before that time and again afterward, Neptune was more distant than Pluto from the Sun.
Observations from Earth have revealed that Pluto’s brightness varies with a period of 6.3873 Earth days, which is now well established as its rotation period (sidereal day). Of the planets, only Mercury, with a rotation period of almost 59 days, and Venus, with 243 days, turn more slowly. Pluto’s axis of rotation is tilted at an angle of 120° from the perpendicular to the plane of its orbit, so that its north pole actually points 30° below the plane. (By convention, above the plane is taken to mean in the direction of Earth’s and the Sun’s north poles; below, in the opposite direction. For comparison, Earth’s north polar axis is tilted 23.5° away from the perpendicular, above its orbital plane.) Pluto thus rotates nearly on its side in a retrograde direction (opposite the direction of rotation of the Sun and most of the planets); an observer on its surface would see the Sun rise in the west and set in the east
Compared with the planets, Pluto is also anomalous in its physical characteristics. Pluto has a radius less than half that of Mercury; it is only about two-thirds the size of Earth’s Moon. Next to the outer planets—the giants Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune—it is strikingly tiny. When these characteristics are combined with what is known about its density and composition, Pluto appears to have more in common with the large icy moons of the outer planets than with any of the planets themselves. Its closest twin is Neptune’s moon Triton, which suggests a similar origin for these two bodies (see below Origin of Pluto and its moons). For additional orbital and physical data about Pluto, see the table
Although the detection of methane ice on Pluto’s surface in the 1970s (see below The surface and interior) gave scientists confidence that the body had an atmosphere, direct observation of it had to wait until the next decade. Discovery of its atmosphere was made in 1988 when Pluto passed in front of (occulted) a star as observed from Earth. The star’s light gradually dimmed just before it disappeared behind Pluto, demonstrating the presence of a thin, greatly distended atmosphere. Because Pluto’s atmosphere must consist of vapours in equilibrium with their ices, small changes in temperature should have a large effect on the amount of gas in the atmosphere. During the years surrounding Pluto’s perihelion in 1989, when Pluto was slightly less cold than average, more of its frozen gases vaporized; the atmosphere was then at or near its thickest, making it a favourable time to study the body. Astronomers in the year 2000 estimated a surface pressure in the range of a few to several tens of microbars (one microbar is one-millionth of sea-level pressure on Earth). At aphelion, when Pluto is receiving the least sunlight, its atmosphere may not be detectable at all.
Observations made during occultations showed that nitrogen was the primary gas in the Plutonian atmosphere, which also contained small amounts of methane, carbon monoxide, and hydrogen cyanide. (Nitrogen is also the main constituent of the atmospheres of both Triton and Saturn’s largest satellite, Titan, as well as of Earth.) During its flyby, New Horizons determined the surface pressure to be 10 microbars and found acetylene, ethylene, and ethane in the atmosphere. The temperature near the surface is 45 K (−228 °C, or −379 °F). Haze layers are seen up to an altitude of 200 km (120 miles). The upper atmosphere is quite extended, going up to 1,800 km (1,100 miles) from the surface, and quite cold, which keeps nitrogen from escaping into space.
New Horizons observed only one hemisphere of Pluto. That hemisphere is dominated by Tombaugh Regio, a white heart-shaped plain. The western half of Tombaugh Regio is Sputnik Planitia, a smooth plain of nitrogen ice without impact craters. The lack of craters shows that Sputnik Planitia is a very young feature and thus that Pluto likely has some geologic activity. Tombaugh Regio is surrounded by less smooth regions that contain some mountain ranges. These mountains are made of water ice, which are likely floating in the surrounding nitrogen ice. Higher northern latitudes are covered in darker plains. To the west of Tombaugh Regio is the darkest region on Pluto. Originally nicknamed “the whale” for its shape and later dubbed Cthulhu Regio, this region has a varied topography with plains, scarps, mountains, and craters. This region’s dark colour arises from organic compounds called tholins.
Pluto’s average reflectivity, or albedo, is 0.72 (i.e., it returns 55 percent of the light that strikes it), compared with 0.1 for the Moon and 0.8 for Triton. However, this average albedo encompasses a wide range of reflectivities, with Cthulhu Regio having a reflectivity of 0.1 to 0.2 and Tombaugh Regio having a reflectivity from 0.8 to 1.
The first crude infrared spectroscopic measurements (see spectroscopy), made in 1976, revealed the presence of solid methane on Pluto’s surface. Using new ground-based instrumentation available in the early 1990s, observers discovered ices of water, carbon monoxide, and molecular nitrogen. Although nitrogen’s spectral signature is intrinsically very weak, it is now clear that this substance must be the dominant surface constituent. The methane is present both as patches of pure methane ice and as a frozen “solution” of methane in the nitrogen ice.
Pluto has a density of 1.85 grams per cubic cm, and Charon has a density of 1.7 grams per cubic cm. These values suggest that both bodies are composed of a significant fraction of materials such as silicate rock and organic compounds denser than water ice (which has a density of 1 gram per cubic cm). Charon’s lower density may have arisen from its being more porous or having a lower fraction of rock. Pluto, like the icy moons of Jupiter and Saturn, likely has an inner rocky core surrounded by a thick mantle of water ice. The frozen nitrogen, carbon monoxide, and methane observed on its surface are in the form of a relatively thin layer, similar to the layer of water on Earth’s surface. Sputnik Planitia is a deep basin that may have formed as a result of an impact. It is located on Pluto’s tidal axis; that is, it is on the opposite side of the dwarf planet from Charon. Sputnik Planitia’s location requires that there be extra mass underneath it, and this extra mass may be from a subsurface ocean above the rocky core and below the water ice mantle.
Pluto possesses five known moons. Charon, by far the largest, is fully half the size of Pluto. It revolves around Pluto—more accurately, the two bodies revolve around a common centre of mass—at a distance of about 19,640 km (12,200 miles), equal to about eight Pluto diameters. (By contrast, Earth’s Moon is a little more than one-fourth the size of Earth and is separated from the latter by about 30 Earth diameters.) Charon’s period of revolution is exactly equal to the rotation period of Pluto itself; in other words, Charon is in synchronous orbit around Pluto. As a result, Charon is visible from only one hemisphere of Pluto. It remains above the same location on Pluto’s surface, never rising or setting (just as do communications satellites in geostationary orbits over Earth; see spaceflight: Earth orbit). In addition, as with most moons in the solar system, Charon is in a state of synchronous rotation; i.e., it always presents the same face to Pluto.
Charon is somewhat less reflective (has a lower albedo—about 0.25) than Pluto and is more neutral in colour. Its spectrum reveals the presence of water ice, which is the dominant surface constituent. There is no hint of the solid methane that is so obvious on its larger neighbour. Charon’s surface also has patches of ammonia in some of its impact craters. As discussed above in the section The surface and interior, Charon’s density implies that the moon contains materials such as silicates and organic compounds that are denser than water ice. For additional data about Charon, see the table.
Pluto’s other four moons—Hydra, Nix, Kerberos, and Styx—are much smaller than Charon. All four are elongated. They revolve around Pluto outside Charon’s path in nearly circular orbits (like Charon) and in the same orbital plane as Charon. The orbital radius of Hydra is about 64,721 km (40,216 miles); that of Kerberos is 57,750 km (35,884 miles); that of Nix is 48,690 km (30,254 miles); and that of Styx is 42,413 km (26,354 miles). Styx, Nix, and Kerberos are as reflective as Charon, while Hydra is more reflective.
For every orbit completed by Charon, Hydra completes about one-sixth of an orbit, Kerberos about one-fifth, Nix about one-fourth, and Styx one-third. This means that the orbital periods of Hydra, Kerberos, Nix, and Styx are in a 6:5:4:3 ratio. These relationships of the orbital periods, which are approximately in the ratios of small whole numbers, suggest that Hydra, Nix, Kerberos, and Styx are in stable dynamic resonances with Charon and with each other; that is, all five bodies pass one another periodically, interacting via gravity in a way that tends to maintain the regularity of their encounters. Because of the ever-changing gravitational field of Pluto and Charon (which rotate around each other), Nix and Hydra rotate chaotically with their poles sometimes flipping. Unlike most of the other satellites in the solar system, Pluto’s four smaller moons are not in synchronous rotation with the planet; that is, their rotation period is not the same as their orbital period. Rotation periods range from 0.4295 day for Hydra to 5.31 days for Kerberos
When Pluto was found, it was considered the third planet to be discovered, after Uranus and Neptune, as opposed to the six planets that have been visible in the sky to the naked eye since ancient times. The existence of a ninth planet had been postulated beginning in the late 19th century on the basis of apparent perturbations of the orbital motion of Uranus, which suggested that a more-distant body was gravitationally disturbing it. Astronomers later realized that these perturbations were spurious—the gravitational force from Pluto’s small mass is not strong enough to have been the source of the suspected disturbances. Thus, Pluto’s discovery was a remarkable coincidence attributable to careful observations rather than to accurate prediction of the existence of a hypothetical planet
The search for the expected planet was supported most actively at the Lowell Observatory in Flagstaff, Arizona, U.S., in the early 20th century. It was initiated by the founder of the observatory, Percival Lowell, an American astronomer who had achieved notoriety through his highly publicized claims of canal sightings on Mars. After two unsuccessful attempts to find the planet prior to Lowell’s death in 1916, an astronomical camera built specifically for this purpose and capable of collecting light from a wide field of sky was put into service in 1929, and a young amateur astronomer, Clyde Tombaugh, was hired to carry out the search. On February 18, 1930, less than one year after he began his work, Tombaugh found Pluto in the constellation Gemini. The object appeared as a dim “star” of the 15th magnitude that slowly changed its position against the fixed background stars as it pursued its 248-year orbit around the Sun. Although Lowell and other astronomers had predicted that the unknown planet would be much larger and brighter than the object Tombaugh found, Pluto was quickly accepted as the expected ninth planet. The symbol invented for it, ♇, stands both for the first two letters of Pluto and for the initials of Percival Lowell
Charon was discovered in 1978 on images of Pluto that had been recorded photographically at the U.S. Naval Observatory station in Flagstaff, fewer than 6 km (3.7 miles) from the site of Pluto’s discovery. These images were being recorded by James W. Christy and Robert S. Harrington in an attempt to obtain more-accurate measurements of Pluto’s orbit. The new satellite was named after the boatman in Greek mythology who ferries dead souls to Hades’ realm in the underworld
Prior to the discovery of Charon, Pluto was thought to be larger and more massive than it actually is; there was no way to determine either quantity directly. Even in the discovery images, Charon appears as an unresolved bump on the side of Pluto, an indication of the observational difficulties posed by the relative nearness of the two bodies, their great distance from Earth, and the distorting effects of Earth’s atmosphere. Only near the end of the 20th century, with the availability of the Hubble Space Telescope (HST) and Earth-based instruments equipped with adaptive optics that compensate for atmospheric turbulence, did astronomers first resolve Pluto and Charon into separate bodies.
A team of nine astronomers working in the United States discovered two small moons, Hydra and Nix, in 2005 in images made with the Hubble Space Telescope during a concerted search for objects traveling around Pluto as small as 25 km (16 miles) in diameter. To confirm the orbits, the astronomers checked Hubble images of Pluto and Charon made in 2002 for surface-mapping studies and found faint but definite indications of two objects moving along the orbital paths calculated from the 2005 images.
In 2011 six astronomers discovered the small moon Kerberos in images made with the HST. As with the discovery of Nix and Hydra, the astronomers checked earlier Hubble images and found faint traces of what appeared to be Kerberos in images from 2006 and 2010. The HST was used again in 2012 to find Styx.
Before the discovery of Charon, it was popular to assume that Pluto was a former moon of Neptune that had somehow escaped its orbit. This idea gained support from the apparent similarity of the dimensions of Pluto and Triton and the near coincidence in Triton’s orbital period (5.9 days) and Pluto’s rotation period (6.4 days). It was suggested that a close encounter between these two bodies when they were both moons led to the ejection of Pluto from the Neptunian system and caused Triton to assume the retrograde orbit that is presently observed.
Astronomers found it difficult to establish the likelihood that all these events would have occurred, and the discovery of Charon provided information that further refuted the theory. Because the revised mass of Pluto is only half that of Triton, Pluto clearly could not have caused the reversal of Triton’s orbit. Also, the fact that Pluto has a proportionally large moon of its own makes the escape idea implausible. Current thinking favours the idea that Pluto and Charon instead formed as two independent bodies in the solar nebula, the gaseous cloud from which the solar system condensed (see solar system: Origin of the solar system). A collision between Pluto and a proto-Charon could have produced a debris ring around Pluto that accreted by gravitational attraction to form the present moon. This scenario is similar to the currently favoured model for the formation of the Moon as a result of the collision of a Mars-sized body with Earth (see Moon: Origin and evolution). Just as the Moon appears to be deficient in volatile elements relative to Earth as a consequence of its high-temperature origin, so also can the absence of methane on Charon, along with the relatively high densities of both Pluto and Charon, be explained by a similar process.
Astronomers have argued that Pluto’s four small moons also are products of the same collision that resulted in the present Charon. The alternative scenario—that they formed independently elsewhere in the outer solar system and were later gravitationally captured by the Pluto-Charon system—does not appear likely given the combination of circular coplanar orbits and multiple dynamic resonances that currently exist for the two small bodies and Charon. Rather, these conditions suggest that material in the ring of debris that was ejected from the collision accreted into all three moons—and possibly into others yet to be found.
This collision scenario implies that at the time the Pluto-Charon system formed, about 4.6 billion years ago, the outer solar nebula contained many icy bodies with the same approximate dimensions as these two. The bodies themselves are thought to have been built up from smaller entities that today would be recognized as the nuclei of comets. Triton is presumably another of these large icy planetesimals, captured into orbit by Neptune in the planet’s early history. Chiron, a small body orbiting the Sun between Saturn and Uranus and believed to be a giant comet nucleus, and Phoebe, a moon of Saturn, represent somewhat smaller examples of such objects.
Most of these icy planetesimals were incorporated into the cores of the giant planets during their formation. Many others, however, are thought to have remained as the unconsolidated debris that makes up the Kuiper belt—a thick disk-shaped region, flattened toward the plane of the solar system, that lies beyond Neptune’s orbit and, significantly, includes the outer part of Pluto’s orbit. Billions more icy objects were scattered to the outermost reaches of the solar system during the formation of Uranus and Neptune; they are believed to form the Oort cloud, a huge spherical shell surrounding the solar system at a distance of some 50,000 AU. After more than a thousand Kuiper belt objects (KBOs) were directly observed starting in the early 1990s, astronomers came to the conclusion that Pluto and Charon likely are large members of the Kuiper belt and that bodies such as Chiron, Neptune’s moon Triton, and a number of other icy moons of the outer planets originated as KBOs. In fact, like Pluto, there is one group of KBOs having highly eccentric orbits inclined to the plane of the solar system and exhibiting the same stabilizing 3:2 orbital resonance with Neptune. In recognition of this affinity, astronomers named this group of objects Plutinos (“little Plutos”).
Prior to the removal of Pluto from the official list of planets, astronomers had never established a rigorous scientific definition of a solar system planet, nor had they agreed on a minimum mass, radius, or mechanism of origin for a body to qualify as one. The traditional “instinctive” distinctions between the larger planetary bodies of the solar system, their moons, and small bodies such as asteroids and comets were made when their differences had seemed more profound and clear-cut and when the nature of the small bodies as remnant building blocks of the planets was dimly perceived. This early, disjointed conception of the solar system was in some ways analogous to the situation described by the Indian fable of the blind men, each of whom identified a different object after touching a different part of the same elephant. It later became clear that the original groupings of the components of the solar system required reclassification under a set of more-complex, interrelated definitions.
If Pluto had been discovered in the context of the Kuiper belt rather than as an isolated entity, it might never have been ranked with the eight planets. Indeed, in the decades after Pluto’s discovery, some astronomers continued to question its planetary status in view of its small size, icy composition, and anomalous orbital characteristics. Moreover, about the turn of the 21st century, astronomers observed several KBOs that are each roughly the size of Charon and one, named Eris, that is slightly larger than Pluto itself. Because Pluto was no longer unique in the outer reaches of the solar system, it became incumbent on astronomers either to admit additional members into the planetary ranks or to exclude Pluto. In 2006 the IAU voted to take the latter course while establishing the category of dwarf planets to recognize the larger, more-massive members of a given population of objects having similar compositions and origins and occupying the same orbital “neighbourhood.” Thus, Pluto, Eris, and Ceres—Ceres, with a diameter of some 940 km (585 miles), is the largest object in the asteroid belt—were designated dwarf planets. In June 2008 the IAU created a subcategory within the dwarf planet category, called plutoids, for all dwarf planets that are farther from the Sun than Neptune—that is, bodies that are large KBOs. Pluto and Eris are plutoids; Ceres, because of its location in the asteroid belt, is not. Since then, two more KBOs, Makemake and Haumea, have been designated dwarf planets and plutoids.
